+++
date = "2018-10-17"
title = "The Fourth Industrial Revolution: Don't Forget The Social Sciences"
slug = "4IR-dont-forget-the-social-sciences"
tags = []
categories = []
+++

The rapid and heretofore unprecedented advancement of technological innovation and the associated exponential changes that the “fourth industrial revolution” (4IR) has brought about have prompted widespread discussion about the future of work, society, and human dignity. At one extreme, proponents extoll the boundless virtues of artificial intelligence, industrial-automation and machine learning, proclaiming that such innovations will ultimately bring about a better future for all. At another extreme are those who emphasize the capacity of such technologies to further exacerbate economic inequality and reshape capital’s traditional dependence on labour. Between these extremes are those who emphasize the human capacity to adapt in the face of challenges. From such a perspective, through re-skilling, education, and training, rather than the wholesale displacement of labour, the 4IR will bring about a change in the nature of work and how people and machines co-exist and co-operate in the society of the future.

These changes are not isolated to advanced economies or far-flung manufacturing powerhouses. A recent [study](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/20421338.2018.1478482?journalCode=rajs20) conducted at Stellenbosch University indicates that the occupations of at least 35% of South African workers are highly susceptible to automation in the coming years. For a country with an unemployment rate over 25% and a legacy of deep structural inequality, such a prediction holds dire consequences for many ordinary South Africans. Moreover, as the tide of technological-sophistication rises, jobs once requiring only limited education or technological know-how will come to demand increasingly specialised skills and knowledge.

In South Africa, the critical skills gap characterising many domains and the need to redress a history of inequality, while still endeavouring to insure global competitiveness and growth, necessitate a clear and well-considered understanding of how the 4IR will come to alter the way people work, live and relate to one another. A key component of this is contemplating the role that education will play in ensuring that South Africans are equipped to face these coming challenges. The question then arises: *what skills do South African youth today need to obtain to prepare for the world of work of tomorrow?*

One answer frequently provided to such a question is STEM – to be prepared for the demands of an increasingly techno-centric workplace skills in science, technology, engineering and mathematics are needed. This sentiment was recently championed by World Economic Forum executive chairperson [Professor Klaus Schwab](http://www.engineeringnews.co.za/article/entrepreneurial-spirit-collaboration-education-needed-to-advance-fourth-industrial-revolution-wef-chairperson-2018-06-28/rep_id:4136), who stated that, for South Africa to benefit from the opportunities of the 4IR, innovation and education in the STEM fields would need to be fostered. Intuitively, such proposals are sound. To be able to work with and develop the technologies that will characterise many occupations in the years to come a deep understanding of the relevant tools and techniques will enable South Africans to not only keep pace with the developed world but, importantly, to bring about much-needed economic growth.

An alternative answer suggests that, rather than purely emphasizing the value of STEM skills, the growing importance of social skills in the labour market cannot be ignored. A recent [study](https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/132/4/1593/3861633) conducted at Harvard University has shown that, in the United States, the labour market is increasingly rewarding social skills over pure technical know-how. This is not to say that emphasizing STEM is not important. Rather, such studies underscore the [complementary](https://qz.com/1383648/automation-will-remind-us-that-we-are-not-defined-by-what-we-do/) nature of human-machine interactions and how, in many cases ''[the tasks that cannot be automated are generally complemented by it](https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/132/4/1593/3861633)''.

Furthermore, from a societal perspective, the fundamental questions presented by the 4IR will, in many cases, require Social Science expertise rather than STEM skills. These questions range in nature but share the same core idea: *how should we best organise human life?* Addressing such a question requires a deep understanding of how people think and behave and, importantly, critical thinking about how we should behave. Fields such as Sociology, Psychology, Philosophy, and Economics are critical to equipping today’s youth for such challenges.

The changes brought about by the 4IR will fundamentally alter the way people work, live and relate to one another. To be prepared for such changes, to be able to ''[race with the machines](https://www.ted.com/talks/erik_brynjolfsson_the_key_to_growth_race_em_with_em_the_machines/discussion?utm_source=t.co&utm_medium=on.ted.com-twitter&utm_campaign=&utm_content=awesm-publisher&awesm=on.ted.com_j09x9)'', the youth of today will require a new mix of skills, with an equal emphasis on deep technical knowledge, complemented by a critical understanding of how people think and behave.
